flink/README.md, before:

# Flink/Delta Connector

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache%202-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors/blob/master/LICENSE.txt)

Official Delta Lake connector for [Apache Flink](https://flink.apache.org/).

## Table of contents
- [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [APIs](#apis)
  - [Known limitations](#known-limitations)
- [Delta Sink](#delta-sink)
  - [Metrics](#delta-sink-metrics)
  - [Examples](#delta-sink-examples)
- [Delta Source](#delta-source)
  - [Modes](#modes)
  - [Examples](#delta-source-examples)
- [Usage](#usage)
  - [Maven](#maven)
  - [SBT](#sbt)
- [Building](#building)
- [FAQ](#frequently-asked-questions-faq)
- [Known Issues](#known-issues)

## Introduction

Flink/Delta Connector is a JVM library to read and write data from Apache Flink applications to Delta tables
utilizing the [Delta Standalone JVM library](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors#delta-standalone).
The connector provides exactly-once delivery guarantees.

Flink/Delta Connector includes:
- `DeltaSink` for writing data from Apache Flink to a Delta table.
- `DeltaSource` for reading Delta tables using Apache Flink.

Depending on the version of the connector you can use it with following Apache Flink versions:
  
| Connector's version | Flink's version |
|:-------------------:|:---------------:|
|  0.4.x (Sink Only)  |    1.12.0 <= X <= 1.14.5    |
|        0.5.x        |    1.13.0 <= X <= 1.14.5    |

### APIs

See the [Java API docs](https://delta-io.github.io/connectors/latest/delta-flink/api/java/index.html) here.

### Known limitations

- The current version only supports Flink `Datastream` API. Support for Flink Table API / SQL, along with Flink Catalog's implementation for storing Delta table's metadata in an external metastore, are planned to be added in a future release.
- For GCP Object Storage, the current version only supports reading. Writing to GCP Object Storage is not supported. This is due to Flink not supporting recoverable writes to GCS, which was added in Flink [1.15](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-11838).
- For AWS S3 storage, in order to ensure concurrent transactional writes from different clusters, use [multi-cluster configuration guidelines](https://docs.delta.io/latest/delta-storage.html#multi-cluster-setup). Please see [example](#3-sink-creation-with-multi-cluster-support-for-delta-standalone) for how to use this configuration in Flink Delta Sink. 

## Delta Sink

<div id='delta-sink-metrics'></div>

### Metrics
Delta Sink currently exposes the following Flink metrics:

| metric name |                                        description                                        | update interval |
|:-----------:|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:---------------:|
|    DeltaSinkRecordsOut    |                  Counter for how many records were processed by the sink                  | on every record |
|    DeltaSinkRecordsWritten    |     Counter for how many records were written to the actual files on the file system      |  on checkpoint  |
|    DeltaSinkBytesWritten    | Counter for how many bytes were written to the actual files on the underlying file system |  on checkpoint  |

<div id='delta-sink-examples'></div>

### Examples

#### 1. Sink creation for non-partitioned tables

In this example we show how to create a `DeltaSink` and plug it to an
existing `org.apache.flink.streaming.api.datastream.DataStream`.

```java
import io.delta.flink.sink.DeltaSink;
import org.apache.flink.core.fs.Path;
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.datastream.DataStream;
import org.apache.flink.table.data.RowData;
import org.apache.flink.table.types.logical.RowType;
import org.apache.hadoop.conf.Configuration;

public DataStream<RowData> createDeltaSink(
        DataStream<RowData> stream,
        String deltaTablePath,
        RowType rowType) {
    DeltaSink<RowData> deltaSink = DeltaSink
        .forRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration(),
            rowType)
        .build();
    stream.sinkTo(deltaSink);
    return stream;
}
```

#### 2. Sink creation for partitioned tables

In this example we show how to create a `DeltaSink` for `org.apache.flink.table.data.RowData` to
write data to a partitioned table using one partitioning column `surname`.

```java
import io.delta.flink.sink.DeltaBucketAssigner;
import io.delta.flink.sink.DeltaSinkBuilder;

public DataStream<RowData> createDeltaSink(
        DataStream<RowData> stream,
        String deltaTablePath) {
    String[] partitionCols = { "surname" };
    DeltaSink<RowData> deltaSink = DeltaSink
        .forRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration(),
            rowType)
        .withPartitionColumns(partitionCols)
        .build();
    stream.sinkTo(deltaSink);
    return stream;
}
```
#### 3. Sink creation with multi cluster support for Delta standalone
In this example we will show how to create `DeltaSink` with [multi-cluster configuration](https://docs.delta.io/latest/delta-storage.html#multi-cluster-setup).

```java
public DataStream<RowData> createDeltaSink(
        DataStream<RowData> stream,
        String deltaTablePath) {
    String[] partitionCols = { "surname" };

    Configuration configuration = new Configuration();
    configuration.set("spark.hadoop.fs.s3a.access.key", "USE_YOUR_S3_ACCESS_KEY_HERE");
    configuration.set("spark.hadoop.fs.s3a.secret.key", "USE_YOUR_S3_SECRET_KEY_HERE");
    configuration.set("spark.delta.logStore.s3a.impl", "io.delta.storage.S3DynamoDBLogStore");
    configuration.set("spark.io.delta.storage.S3DynamoDBLogStore.ddb.region", "eu-central-1");
        
    DeltaSink<RowData> deltaSink = DeltaSink
        .forRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            configuration,
            rowType)
        .build();
    stream.sinkTo(deltaSink);
    return stream;
}
```

## Delta Source

### Modes

Delta Source can work in one of two modes:
- `bounded` - suitable for batch jobs, where we want to read content of Delta table for specific Snapshot version only.
- `continuous` - suitable for streaming jobs, where we want to read content of Delta table for specific snapshot version and continuously check Delta table for new changes and versions.

The `DeltaSource` class provides factory methods to create sources for both modes.
Please see [documentation](https://delta-io.github.io/connectors/latest/delta-flink/api/java/index.html) and examples for details.

#### Table schema discovery

Flink Delta source connector will use Delta table log to discover columns and their types.
If user did not specify any columns in source definition, all columns from underlying Delta table will be read.
If user specified a collection of column names, using Delta source builder method, then only those columns will be read from underlying Delta table. 
In both cases, Source connector will discover what are the Delta types for every column and will convert them to corresponding Flink types.

#### Partition column discovery

Flink Delta source connector will use Delta table log to determine which columns are partition columns.
No additional actions are needed from user end.

<div id='delta-source-examples'></div>

### Examples

#### 1. Source creation for Delta table, to read all columns in bounded mode. Suitable for batch jobs. This example loads the latest table version.

```java
import org.apache.flink.api.common.eventtime.WatermarkStrategy;
import org.apache.flink.core.fs.Path;
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.datastream.DataStream;
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.environment.StreamExecutionEnvironment;
import org.apache.flink.table.data.RowData;
import org.apache.hadoop.conf.Configuration;

public DataStream<RowData> createBoundedDeltaSourceAllColumns(
        StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
        String deltaTablePath) {

    DeltaSource<RowData> deltaSource = DeltaSource
        .forBoundedRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration())
        .build();

    return env.fromSource(deltaSource, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "delta-source");
}
```

#### 2. Source creation for Delta table, to read all columns in bounded mode. Suitable for batch jobs. This example performs Time Travel and loads a historical version.

```java
public DataStream<RowData> createBoundedDeltaSourceWithTimeTravel(
        StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
        String deltaTablePath) {

    DeltaSource<RowData> deltaSource = DeltaSource
        .forBoundedRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration())
        // could also use `.versionAsOf(314159)`
        .timestampAsOf("2022-06-28 04:55:00")
        .build();

    return env.fromSource(deltaSource, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "delta-source");
}
```

#### 3. Source creation for Delta table, to read only user-defined columns in bounded mode. Suitable for batch jobs. This example loads the latest table version.

```java
public DataStream<RowData> createBoundedDeltaSourceUserColumns(
        StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
        String deltaTablePath,
        String[] columnNames) {

    DeltaSource<RowData> deltaSource = DeltaSource
        .forBoundedRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration())
        .columnNames(columnNames)
        .build();

    return env.fromSource(deltaSource, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "delta-source");
}
```

#### 4. Source creation for Delta table, to read all columns in continuous mode. Suitable for streaming jobs. This example performs Time Travel to get all changes at and after the historical version, and then monitors for changes. It does not load the full table state at that historical version.

```java
public DataStream<RowData> createContinuousDeltaSourceWithTimeTravel(
        StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
        String deltaTablePath) {

    DeltaSource<RowData> deltaSource = DeltaSource
        .forContinuousRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration())
        // could also use `.startingVersion(314159)`
        .startingTimestamp("2022-06-28 04:55:00")
        .build();

    return env.fromSource(deltaSource, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "delta-source");
}
```

#### 5. Source creation for Delta table, to read all columns in continuous mode. Suitable for streaming jobs. This example loads the latest table version and then monitors for changes.

```java
public DataStream<RowData> createContinuousDeltaSourceAllColumns(
        StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
        String deltaTablePath) {

    DeltaSource<RowData> deltaSource = DeltaSource
        .forContinuousRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration())
        .build();

    return env.fromSource(deltaSource, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "delta-source");
}
```

#### 6. Source creation for Delta table, to read only user-defined columns in continuous mode. Suitable for streaming jobs. This example loads the latest table version and then monitors for changes.

```java
public DataStream<RowData> createContinuousDeltaSourceUserColumns(
        StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
        String deltaTablePath,
        String[] columnNames) {

    DeltaSource<RowData> deltaSource = DeltaSource
        .forContinuousRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration())
        .columnNames(columnNames)
        .build();

    return env.fromSource(deltaSource, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "delta-source");
}
```

## Usage

You can add the Flink/Delta Connector library as a dependency using your favorite build tool. Please note
that it expects the following packages to be provided:

- `delta-standalone`
- `flink-parquet`
- `flink-table-common`
- `hadoop-client`

Please see the following build files for more details.

### Maven

Scala 2.12:

```xml
<project>
    <properties>
        <scala.main.version>2.12</scala.main.version>
        <flink-version>1.12.0</flink-version>
        <hadoop-version>3.1.0</hadoop-version>
    </properties>

    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.delta</groupId>
            <artifactId>delta-flink</artifactId>
            <version>0.5.0</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.delta</groupId>
            <artifactId>delta-standalone_${scala.main.version}</artifactId>
            <version>0.5.0</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
            <artifactId>flink-clients_${scala.main.version}</artifactId>
            <version>${flink-version}</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
            <artifactId>flink-parquet_${scala.main.version}</artifactId>
            <version>${flink-version}</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.hadoop</groupId>
            <artifactId>hadoop-client</artifactId>
            <version>${hadoop-version}</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
            <artifactId>flink-table-common</artifactId>
            <version>${flink-version}</version>
            <scope>provided</scope>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
            <artifactId>flink-table-runtime-blink_${scala.main.version}</artifactId>
            <version>${flink-version}</version>
            <scope>provided</scope>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</project>
```

### SBT

Please replace the versions of the dependencies with the ones you are using.

```scala
libraryDependencies ++= Seq(
  "io.delta" %% "delta-flink" % deltaConnectorsVersion,
  "io.delta" %% "delta-standalone" % deltaConnectorsVersion,
  "org.apache.flink" %% "flink-clients" % flinkVersion,
  "org.apache.flink" %% "flink-parquet" % flinkVersion,
  "org.apache.hadoop" % "hadoop-client" % hadoopVersion,
  "org.apache.flink" % "flink-table-common" % flinkVersion % "provided",
  "org.apache.flink" %% "flink-table-runtime-blink" % flinkVersion % "provided")
```

## Building

The project is compiled using [SBT](https://www.scala-sbt.org/1.x/docs/Command-Line-Reference.html).

### Environment requirements

- JDK 8 or above.
- Scala 2.11 or 2.12.

### Build commands

- To compile the project, run `build/sbt flink/compile`
- To test the project, run `build/sbt flink/test`
- To publish the JAR, run `build/sbt flink/publishM2`

## Frequently asked questions (FAQ)

#### Can I use this connector to read data from a Delta table?

No, currently we are supporting only writing to a Delta table. A `DeltaSource` API with the support for reading data from
Delta tables will be added in future releases.

#### Can I use this connector to append data to a Delta table?

Yes, you can use this connector to append data to either an existing or a new Delta table (if there is no existing
Delta log in a given path then it will be created by the connector).

#### Can I use this connector with other modes (overwrite, upsert etc.) ?

No, currently only append is supported. Other modes may be added in future releases.

#### Do I need to specify the partition columns when creating a Delta table?

If you'd like your data to be partitioned, then you should. If you are using the `DataStream API`, then
you can provide the partition columns using the `RowDataDeltaSinkBuilder.withPartitionColumns(List<String> partitionCols)` API.

#### Why do I need to specify the table schema? Shouldn’t it exist in the underlying Delta table metadata or be extracted from the stream's metadata?

Unfortunately we cannot extract schema information from a generic `DataStream`, and it is also required for interacting
with the Delta log. The sink must be aware of both Delta table's schema and the structure of the events in the stream in
order not to violate the integrity of the table.

#### What if I change the underlying Delta table schema ?

Next commit (after mentioned schema change) performed from the `DeltaSink` to the Delta log will fail unless you will
set `shouldTryUpdateSchema` param to true. In such case Delta Standalone will try to merge both schemas and check for
their compatibility. If this check fails (e.g. the change consisted of removing a column) the commit to the Delta Log will fail, which will cause failure of the Flink job.

## Local Development & Testing

- Before local debugging of `flink` tests in IntelliJ, run all `flink` tests using SBT. It will
  generate `Meta.java` object under your target directory that is providing the connector with correct version of the
  connector.

## Known issues:

- (0.4.x) Due to a dependency conflict with some Apache Flink packages, it may be necessary to shade
  classes from `org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.sink.filesystem` package when producing a fat-jar
  with a Flink job that uses this connector before deploying it to a Flink cluster.
  
  If that package is not shaded, you may experience errors like the following:
  
  ```
  Caused by: java.lang.IllegalAccessError: tried to access method org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.sink.filesystem.OutputStreamBasedPartFileWriter.<init>(Ljava/lang/Object;Lorg/apache/flink/core/fs/RecoverableFsDataOutputStream;J)V from class org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.sink.filesystem.DeltaBulkPartWriter
  ```

  Here is an example configuration for achieving this:

  ```xml
  <plugin>
      <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
      <artifactId>maven-shade-plugin</artifactId>
      <version>3.3.0</version>
      <executions>
          <execution>
              <phase>package</phase>
              <goals>
                  <goal>shade</goal>
              </goals>
              <configuration>
                  <shadedArtifactAttached>true</shadedArtifactAttached>
                  <relocations>
                      <relocation>
                          <pattern>org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.sink.filesystem</pattern>
                          <shadedPattern>shaded.org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.sink.filesystem</shadedPattern>
                      </relocation>
                  </relocations>
                  <filters>
                      <filter>
                          <artifact>*:*</artifact>
                          <excludes>
                              <exclude>META-INF/*.SF</exclude>
                              <exclude>META-INF/*.DSA</exclude>
                              <exclude>META-INF/*.RSA</exclude>
                          </excludes>
                      </filter>
                  </filters>
              </configuration>
          </execution>
      </executions>
  </plugin>
  ```

Commit message:

ReadmeUpdate_Azure - add known limitation for Azure writes. (#402)
* ReadmeUpdate_Azure - add known limitation for Azure writes.

Signed-off-by: Krzysztof Chmielewski <krzysztof.chmielewski@getindata.com>

* Fix `Bloob` to `Blob`

Co-authored-by: Krzysztof Chmielewski <krzysztof.chmielewski@getindata.com>
Co-authored-by: Scott Sandre <59617782+scottsand-db@users.noreply.github.com>

flink/README.md, after:

# Flink/Delta Connector

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache%202-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors/blob/master/LICENSE.txt)

Official Delta Lake connector for [Apache Flink](https://flink.apache.org/).

## Table of contents
- [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [APIs](#apis)
  - [Known limitations](#known-limitations)
- [Delta Sink](#delta-sink)
  - [Metrics](#delta-sink-metrics)
  - [Examples](#delta-sink-examples)
- [Delta Source](#delta-source)
  - [Modes](#modes)
  - [Examples](#delta-source-examples)
- [Usage](#usage)
  - [Maven](#maven)
  - [SBT](#sbt)
- [Building](#building)
- [FAQ](#frequently-asked-questions-faq)
- [Known Issues](#known-issues)

## Introduction

Flink/Delta Connector is a JVM library to read and write data from Apache Flink applications to Delta tables
utilizing the [Delta Standalone JVM library](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors#delta-standalone).
The connector provides exactly-once delivery guarantees.

Flink/Delta Connector includes:
- `DeltaSink` for writing data from Apache Flink to a Delta table.
- `DeltaSource` for reading Delta tables using Apache Flink.

Depending on the version of the connector you can use it with following Apache Flink versions:
  
| Connector's version | Flink's version |
|:-------------------:|:---------------:|
|  0.4.x (Sink Only)  |    1.12.0 <= X <= 1.14.5    |
|        0.5.x        |    1.13.0 <= X <= 1.14.5    |

### APIs

See the [Java API docs](https://delta-io.github.io/connectors/latest/delta-flink/api/java/index.html) here.

### Known limitations

- The current version only supports Flink `Datastream` API. Support for Flink Table API / SQL, along with Flink Catalog's implementation for storing Delta table's metadata in an external metastore, are planned to be added in a future release.
- For GCP Object Storage, the current version only supports reading. Writing to GCP Object Storage is not supported. This is due to Flink not supporting recoverable writes to GCS, which was added in Flink [1.15](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-11838).
- For Azure Blob Storage, the current version only supports reading. Writing to Azure Blob Storage is not supported by Flink due to [issue](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-17444) with class shading
  and will probably be added along with [Azure Data Lake Store Gen 2 support](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-18568). 
- For AWS S3 storage, in order to ensure concurrent transactional writes from different clusters, use [multi-cluster configuration guidelines](https://docs.delta.io/latest/delta-storage.html#multi-cluster-setup). Please see [example](#3-sink-creation-with-multi-cluster-support-for-delta-standalone) for how to use this configuration in Flink Delta Sink. 

## Delta Sink

<div id='delta-sink-metrics'></div>

### Metrics
Delta Sink currently exposes the following Flink metrics:

| metric name |                                        description                                        | update interval |
|:-----------:|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:---------------:|
|    DeltaSinkRecordsOut    |                  Counter for how many records were processed by the sink                  | on every record |
|    DeltaSinkRecordsWritten    |     Counter for how many records were written to the actual files on the file system      |  on checkpoint  |
|    DeltaSinkBytesWritten    | Counter for how many bytes were written to the actual files on the underlying file system |  on checkpoint  |

<div id='delta-sink-examples'></div>

### Examples

#### 1. Sink creation for non-partitioned tables

In this example we show how to create a `DeltaSink` and plug it to an
existing `org.apache.flink.streaming.api.datastream.DataStream`.

```java
import io.delta.flink.sink.DeltaSink;
import org.apache.flink.core.fs.Path;
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.datastream.DataStream;
import org.apache.flink.table.data.RowData;
import org.apache.flink.table.types.logical.RowType;
import org.apache.hadoop.conf.Configuration;

public DataStream<RowData> createDeltaSink(
        DataStream<RowData> stream,
        String deltaTablePath,
        RowType rowType) {
    DeltaSink<RowData> deltaSink = DeltaSink
        .forRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration(),
            rowType)
        .build();
    stream.sinkTo(deltaSink);
    return stream;
}
```

#### 2. Sink creation for partitioned tables

In this example we show how to create a `DeltaSink` for `org.apache.flink.table.data.RowData` to
write data to a partitioned table using one partitioning column `surname`.

```java
import io.delta.flink.sink.DeltaBucketAssigner;
import io.delta.flink.sink.DeltaSinkBuilder;

public DataStream<RowData> createDeltaSink(
        DataStream<RowData> stream,
        String deltaTablePath) {
    String[] partitionCols = { "surname" };
    DeltaSink<RowData> deltaSink = DeltaSink
        .forRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration(),
            rowType)
        .withPartitionColumns(partitionCols)
        .build();
    stream.sinkTo(deltaSink);
    return stream;
}
```
#### 3. Sink creation with multi cluster support for Delta standalone
In this example we will show how to create `DeltaSink` with [multi-cluster configuration](https://docs.delta.io/latest/delta-storage.html#multi-cluster-setup).

```java
public DataStream<RowData> createDeltaSink(
        DataStream<RowData> stream,
        String deltaTablePath) {
    String[] partitionCols = { "surname" };

    Configuration configuration = new Configuration();
    configuration.set("spark.hadoop.fs.s3a.access.key", "USE_YOUR_S3_ACCESS_KEY_HERE");
    configuration.set("spark.hadoop.fs.s3a.secret.key", "USE_YOUR_S3_SECRET_KEY_HERE");
    configuration.set("spark.delta.logStore.s3a.impl", "io.delta.storage.S3DynamoDBLogStore");
    configuration.set("spark.io.delta.storage.S3DynamoDBLogStore.ddb.region", "eu-central-1");
        
    DeltaSink<RowData> deltaSink = DeltaSink
        .forRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            configuration,
            rowType)
        .build();
    stream.sinkTo(deltaSink);
    return stream;
}
```

## Delta Source

### Modes

Delta Source can work in one of two modes:
- `bounded` - suitable for batch jobs, where we want to read content of Delta table for specific Snapshot version only.
- `continuous` - suitable for streaming jobs, where we want to read content of Delta table for specific snapshot version and continuously check Delta table for new changes and versions.

The `DeltaSource` class provides factory methods to create sources for both modes.
Please see [documentation](https://delta-io.github.io/connectors/latest/delta-flink/api/java/index.html) and examples for details.

#### Table schema discovery

Flink Delta source connector will use Delta table log to discover columns and their types.
If user did not specify any columns in source definition, all columns from underlying Delta table will be read.
If user specified a collection of column names, using Delta source builder method, then only those columns will be read from underlying Delta table. 
In both cases, Source connector will discover what are the Delta types for every column and will convert them to corresponding Flink types.

#### Partition column discovery

Flink Delta source connector will use Delta table log to determine which columns are partition columns.
No additional actions are needed from user end.

<div id='delta-source-examples'></div>

### Examples

#### 1. Source creation for Delta table, to read all columns in bounded mode. Suitable for batch jobs. This example loads the latest table version.

```java
import org.apache.flink.api.common.eventtime.WatermarkStrategy;
import org.apache.flink.core.fs.Path;
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.datastream.DataStream;
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.environment.StreamExecutionEnvironment;
import org.apache.flink.table.data.RowData;
import org.apache.hadoop.conf.Configuration;

public DataStream<RowData> createBoundedDeltaSourceAllColumns(
        StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
        String deltaTablePath) {

    DeltaSource<RowData> deltaSource = DeltaSource
        .forBoundedRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration())
        .build();

    return env.fromSource(deltaSource, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "delta-source");
}
```

#### 2. Source creation for Delta table, to read all columns in bounded mode. Suitable for batch jobs. This example performs Time Travel and loads a historical version.

```java
public DataStream<RowData> createBoundedDeltaSourceWithTimeTravel(
        StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
        String deltaTablePath) {

    DeltaSource<RowData> deltaSource = DeltaSource
        .forBoundedRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration())
        // could also use `.versionAsOf(314159)`
        .timestampAsOf("2022-06-28 04:55:00")
        .build();

    return env.fromSource(deltaSource, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "delta-source");
}
```

#### 3. Source creation for Delta table, to read only user-defined columns in bounded mode. Suitable for batch jobs. This example loads the latest table version.

```java
public DataStream<RowData> createBoundedDeltaSourceUserColumns(
        StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
        String deltaTablePath,
        String[] columnNames) {

    DeltaSource<RowData> deltaSource = DeltaSource
        .forBoundedRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration())
        .columnNames(columnNames)
        .build();

    return env.fromSource(deltaSource, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "delta-source");
}
```

#### 4. Source creation for Delta table, to read all columns in continuous mode. Suitable for streaming jobs. This example performs Time Travel to get all changes at and after the historical version, and then monitors for changes. It does not load the full table state at that historical version.

```java
public DataStream<RowData> createContinuousDeltaSourceWithTimeTravel(
        StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
        String deltaTablePath) {

    DeltaSource<RowData> deltaSource = DeltaSource
        .forContinuousRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration())
        // could also use `.startingVersion(314159)`
        .startingTimestamp("2022-06-28 04:55:00")
        .build();

    return env.fromSource(deltaSource, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "delta-source");
}
```

#### 5. Source creation for Delta table, to read all columns in continuous mode. Suitable for streaming jobs. This example loads the latest table version and then monitors for changes.

```java
public DataStream<RowData> createContinuousDeltaSourceAllColumns(
        StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
        String deltaTablePath) {

    DeltaSource<RowData> deltaSource = DeltaSource
        .forContinuousRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration())
        .build();

    return env.fromSource(deltaSource, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "delta-source");
}
```

#### 6. Source creation for Delta table, to read only user-defined columns in continuous mode. Suitable for streaming jobs. This example loads the latest table version and then monitors for changes.

```java
public DataStream<RowData> createContinuousDeltaSourceUserColumns(
        StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
        String deltaTablePath,
        String[] columnNames) {

    DeltaSource<RowData> deltaSource = DeltaSource
        .forContinuousRowData(
            new Path(deltaTablePath),
            new Configuration())
        .columnNames(columnNames)
        .build();

    return env.fromSource(deltaSource, WatermarkStrategy.noWatermarks(), "delta-source");
}
```

## Usage

You can add the Flink/Delta Connector library as a dependency using your favorite build tool. Please note
that it expects the following packages to be provided:

- `delta-standalone`
- `flink-parquet`
- `flink-table-common`
- `hadoop-client`

Please see the following build files for more details.

### Maven

Scala 2.12:

```xml
<project>
    <properties>
        <scala.main.version>2.12</scala.main.version>
        <flink-version>1.12.0</flink-version>
        <hadoop-version>3.1.0</hadoop-version>
    </properties>

    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.delta</groupId>
            <artifactId>delta-flink</artifactId>
            <version>0.5.0</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.delta</groupId>
            <artifactId>delta-standalone_${scala.main.version}</artifactId>
            <version>0.5.0</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
            <artifactId>flink-clients_${scala.main.version}</artifactId>
            <version>${flink-version}</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
            <artifactId>flink-parquet_${scala.main.version}</artifactId>
            <version>${flink-version}</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.hadoop</groupId>
            <artifactId>hadoop-client</artifactId>
            <version>${hadoop-version}</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
            <artifactId>flink-table-common</artifactId>
            <version>${flink-version}</version>
            <scope>provided</scope>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
            <artifactId>flink-table-runtime-blink_${scala.main.version}</artifactId>
            <version>${flink-version}</version>
            <scope>provided</scope>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</project>
```

### SBT

Please replace the versions of the dependencies with the ones you are using.

```scala
libraryDependencies ++= Seq(
  "io.delta" %% "delta-flink" % deltaConnectorsVersion,
  "io.delta" %% "delta-standalone" % deltaConnectorsVersion,
  "org.apache.flink" %% "flink-clients" % flinkVersion,
  "org.apache.flink" %% "flink-parquet" % flinkVersion,
  "org.apache.hadoop" % "hadoop-client" % hadoopVersion,
  "org.apache.flink" % "flink-table-common" % flinkVersion % "provided",
  "org.apache.flink" %% "flink-table-runtime-blink" % flinkVersion % "provided")
```

## Building

The project is compiled using [SBT](https://www.scala-sbt.org/1.x/docs/Command-Line-Reference.html).

### Environment requirements

- JDK 8 or above.
- Scala 2.11 or 2.12.

### Build commands

- To compile the project, run `build/sbt flink/compile`
- To test the project, run `build/sbt flink/test`
- To publish the JAR, run `build/sbt flink/publishM2`

## Frequently asked questions (FAQ)

#### Can I use this connector to read data from a Delta table?

No, currently we are supporting only writing to a Delta table. A `DeltaSource` API with the support for reading data from
Delta tables will be added in future releases.

#### Can I use this connector to append data to a Delta table?

Yes, you can use this connector to append data to either an existing or a new Delta table (if there is no existing
Delta log in a given path then it will be created by the connector).

#### Can I use this connector with other modes (overwrite, upsert etc.) ?

No, currently only append is supported. Other modes may be added in future releases.

#### Do I need to specify the partition columns when creating a Delta table?

If you'd like your data to be partitioned, then you should. If you are using the `DataStream API`, then
you can provide the partition columns using the `RowDataDeltaSinkBuilder.withPartitionColumns(List<String> partitionCols)` API.

#### Why do I need to specify the table schema? Shouldn’t it exist in the underlying Delta table metadata or be extracted from the stream's metadata?

Unfortunately we cannot extract schema information from a generic `DataStream`, and it is also required for interacting
with the Delta log. The sink must be aware of both Delta table's schema and the structure of the events in the stream in
order not to violate the integrity of the table.

#### What if I change the underlying Delta table schema ?

Next commit (after mentioned schema change) performed from the `DeltaSink` to the Delta log will fail unless you will
set `shouldTryUpdateSchema` param to true. In such case Delta Standalone will try to merge both schemas and check for
their compatibility. If this check fails (e.g. the change consisted of removing a column) the commit to the Delta Log will fail, which will cause failure of the Flink job.

## Local Development & Testing

- Before local debugging of `flink` tests in IntelliJ, run all `flink` tests using SBT. It will
  generate `Meta.java` object under your target directory that is providing the connector with correct version of the
  connector.

## Known issues:

- (0.4.x) Due to a dependency conflict with some Apache Flink packages, it may be necessary to shade
  classes from `org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.sink.filesystem` package when producing a fat-jar
  with a Flink job that uses this connector before deploying it to a Flink cluster.
  
  If that package is not shaded, you may experience errors like the following:
  
  ```
  Caused by: java.lang.IllegalAccessError: tried to access method org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.sink.filesystem.OutputStreamBasedPartFileWriter.<init>(Ljava/lang/Object;Lorg/apache/flink/core/fs/RecoverableFsDataOutputStream;J)V from class org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.sink.filesystem.DeltaBulkPartWriter
  ```

  Here is an example configuration for achieving this:

  ```xml
  <plugin>
      <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
      <artifactId>maven-shade-plugin</artifactId>
      <version>3.3.0</version>
      <executions>
          <execution>
              <phase>package</phase>
              <goals>
                  <goal>shade</goal>
              </goals>
              <configuration>
                  <shadedArtifactAttached>true</shadedArtifactAttached>
                  <relocations>
                      <relocation>
                          <pattern>org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.sink.filesystem</pattern>
                          <shadedPattern>shaded.org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.sink.filesystem</shadedPattern>
                      </relocation>
                  </relocations>
                  <filters>
                      <filter>
                          <artifact>*:*</artifact>
                          <excludes>
                              <exclude>META-INF/*.SF</exclude>
                              <exclude>META-INF/*.DSA</exclude>
                              <exclude>META-INF/*.RSA</exclude>
                          </excludes>
                      </filter>
                  </filters>
              </configuration>
          </execution>
      </executions>
  </plugin>
  ```
